CHAPTER 22




       High-Performance Computational
       Intelligence and Forecasting
       Technologies
       Kesheng Wu and Horst D. Simon




22.1   MOTIVATION

This chapter provides an introduction to the Computational Intelligence and Forecast-
ing Technologies (CIFT) project at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL).
The main objective of CIFT is to promote the use of high-performance computing
(HPC) tools and techniques for analysis of streaming data. After noticing the data
volume being given as the explanation for the five-month delay for SEC and CFTC
to issue their report on the 2010 Flash Crash, LBNL started the CIFT project to apply
HPC technologies to manage and analyze financial data. Making timely decisions
with streaming data is a requirement for many business applications, such as avoid-
ing impending failure in the electric power grid or a liquidity crisis in financial mar-
kets. In all these cases, the HPC tools are well suited in handling the complex data
dependencies and providing a timely solution. Over the years, CIFT has worked on
a number of different forms of streaming data, including those from vehicle traffic,
electric power grid, electricity usage, and so on. The following sections explain the
key features of HPC systems, introduce a few special tools used on these systems,
and provide examples of streaming data analyses using these HPC tools.


22.2   REGULATORY RESPONSE TO THE FLASH CRASH OF 2010

On May 6, 2010, at about 2:45 p.m. (U.S. Eastern Daylight Time), the U.S. stock
market experienced a nearly 10% drop in the Dow Jones Industrial Average, only to
recover most of the loss a few minutes later. It took about five months for regulatory
                                                                                    329
330                                  HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

agencies to come up with an investigation report. In front of a congressional panel
investigating the crash, the data volume (~20 terabytes) was given as the primary rea-
son for the long delay. Since HPC systems, such as those at National Energy Research
Scientific Computing (NERSC) center,1 routinely work with hundreds of terabytes
in minutes, we should have no problem processing the data from financial markets.
This led to the establishment of the CIFT project with the mission to apply the HPC
techniques and tools for financial data analysis.
    A key aspect of financial big data is that it consists of mostly time series. Over the
years, the CIFT team, along with numerous collaborators, has developed techniques
to analyze many different forms of data streams and time series. This chapter provides
a brief introduction to the HPC system including both hardware (Section 22.4) and
software (Section 22.5), and recounts a few successful use cases (Section 22.6). We
conclude with a summary of our vision and work so far and also provide contact
information for interested readers.


22.3    BACKGROUND

Advances in computing technology have made it considerably easier to look for com-
plex patterns. This pattern-finding capability is behind a number of recent scientific
breakthroughs, such as the discovery of the Higgs particle (Aad et al. [2016]) and
gravitational waves (Abbot et al. [2016]). This same capability is also at the core
of many internet companies, for example, to match users with advertisers (Zeff and
Aronson [1999], Yen et al. [2009]). However, the hardware and software used in sci-
ence and in commerce are quite different. The HPC tools have some critical advan-
tages that should be useful in a variety of business applications.
    Tools for scientists are typically built around high-performance computing (HPC)
platforms, while the tools for commercial applications are built around cloud comput-
ing platforms. For the purpose of sifting through large volumes of data to find useful
patterns, the two approaches have been shown to work well. However, the marquee
application for HPC systems is large-scale simulation, such as weather models used
for forecasting regional storms in the next few days (Asanovic et al. [2006]). In con-
trast, the commercial cloud was initially motivated by the need to process a large
number of independent data objects concurrently (data parallel tasks).
    For our work, we are primarily interested in analyses of streaming data. In particu-
lar, high-speed complex data streams, such as those from sensor networks monitoring
our nation’s electric power grid and highway systems. This streaming workload is not
ideal for either HPC systems or cloud systems as we discuss below, but we believe
that the HPC ecosystem has more to offer to address the streaming data analysis than
the cloud ecosystem does.
    Cloud systems were originally designed for parallel data tasks, where a large num-
ber of independent data objects can be processed concurrently. The system is thus

1 NERSC is a National User Facility funded by U.S. Department of Energy, located at LBNL. More infor-

 mation about NERSC can be found at http://nersc.gov/.
HPC HARDWARE                                                                         331

designed for high throughput, not for producing real-time responses. However, many
business applications require real-time or near-real-time responses. For example, an
instability event in an electric power grid could develop and grow into a disaster in
minutes; finding the tell-tale signature quickly enough would avert the disaster. Simi-
larly, signs of emerging illiquidity events have been identified in the financial research
literature; quickly finding these signs during the active market trading hours could
offer options to prevent shocks to the market and avoid flash crashes. The ability to
prioritize quick turnaround time is essential in these cases.
    A data stream is by definition available progressively; therefore, there may not be a
large number of data objects to be processed in parallel. Typically, only a fixed amount
of the most recent data records are available for analysis. In this case, an effective way
to harness the computing power of many central processing units (CPUs) cores is to
divide the analytical work on a single data object (or a single time-step) to many CPU
cores. The HPC ecosystem has more advanced tools for this kind of work than the
cloud ecosystem does.
    These are the main points that motivated our work. For a more thorough com-
parison of HPC systems and cloud systems, we refer interested readers to Asanovic
et al. [2006]. In particular, Fox et al. [2015] have created an extensive taxonomy for
describing the similarities and differences for any application scenario.
    In short, we believe the HPC community has a lot to offer to advance the state-of-
the-art for streaming analytics. The CIFT project was established with a mission to
transfer LBNL’s HPC expertise to streaming business applications. We are pursuing
this mission via collaboration, demonstration, and tool development.
    To evaluate the potential uses of HPC technology, we have spent time working
with various applications. This process not only exposes our HPC experts to a variety
of fields, but also makes it possible for us to gather financial support to establish a
demonstration facility.
    With the generous gifts from a number of early supporters of this effort, we estab-
lished a substantial computing cluster dedicated to this work. This dedicated com-
puter (named dirac1) allows users to utilize an HPC system and evaluate their appli-
cations for themselves.
    We are also engaged in a tool development effort to make HPC systems more
usable for streaming data analysis. In the following sections, we will describe the
hardware and software of the dedicated CIFT machine, as well as some of the demon-
stration and tool development efforts. Highlights include improving the data handling
speed by 21-fold, and increasing the speed of computing an early warning indicator
by 720-fold.


22.4   HPC HARDWARE

Legend has it that the first generation of big data systems was built with the spare
computer components gleaned from a university campus. This is likely an urban
legend, but it underscores an important point about the difference between HPC
systems and cloud systems. Theoretically, a HPC system is built with custom
332                                      HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE


 QDR Infiniband
 + 100 Gbps to ANI


 Compute Servers
 504 Nodes at ANL                                              File Servers (8) (/home) 160TB
 720 Nodes at NErsc
  Intel Nehalem
  8 cores/node
                                                                                                                    ESNet


                                              QDR InfiniBand
                                                                                      Aggregation Switch
 Active Storage                                                                                                     10Gb/s
                                                               Mgt Nodes (12)
 Servers
 FLASH/SSD Storage

 Big Memory                                                                                                           ANI
 Servers                                                                                                   Router   100 Gb/s
 1 TD of Memory per node
 15 at ANL / 2 at NERSC
                                                               Gateway Nodes (16)

 GPU Servers
 266 Nvidia cards at ANL



FIGURE 22.1           Schematic of the Magellan cluster (circa 2010), an example of HPC computer cluster



high-cost components, while cloud systems are built with standard low-cost com-
modity components. In practice, since the worldwide investment in HPC systems
is much smaller than that of personal computers, there is no way for manufacturers
to produce custom components just for the HPC market. The truth is that HPC
systems are largely assembled from commodity components just like cloud systems.
However, due to their different target applications, there are some differences in
their choices of the components.
    Let us describe the computing elements, storage system, and networking system in
turn. Figure 22.1 is a high-level schematic diagram representing the key components
of the Magellan cluster around year 2010 (Jackson et al. [2010]; Yelick et al. [2011]).
The computer elements include both CPUs and graphics processing units (GPUs).
These CPUs and GPUs are commercial products in almost all the cases. For example,
the nodes on dirac1 use a 24-core 2.2Ghz Intel processor, which is common to cloud
computing systems. Currently, dirac1 does not contain GPUs.
    The networking system consists of two parts: the InfiniBand network connecting
the components within the cluster, and the switched network connection to the out-
side world. In this particular example, the outside connections are labeled “ESNet”
and “ANI.” The InfiniBand network switches are also common in cloud computing
systems.
    The storage system in Figure 1 includes both rotating disks and flash storage.
This combination is also common. What is different is that a HPC system typically
has its storage system concentrated outside of the computer nodes, while a typical
cloud computing system has its storage system distributed among the compute
nodes. These two approaches have their own advantages and disadvantages. For
example, the concentrated storage is typically exported as a global file system to all
computer nodes, which makes it easier to deal with data stored in files. However, this
requires a highly capable network connecting the CPUs and the disks. In contrast,
HPC HARDWARE                                                                                 333

the distributed approach could use lower-capacity network because there is some
storage that is close to each CPU. Typically, a distributed file system, such as the
Google file system (Ghemawat, Gobioff, and Leung [2003]), is layered on top of a
cloud computing system to make the storage accessible to all CPUs.
   In short, the current generation of HPC systems and cloud systems use pretty much
the same commercial hardware components. Their differences are primarily in the
arrangement of the storage systems and networking systems. Clearly, the difference
in the storage system designs could affect the application performance. However,
the virtualization layer of the cloud systems is likely the bigger cause of application
performance difference. In the next section, we will discuss another factor that could
have an even larger impact, namely software tools and libraries.
   Virtualization is generally used in the cloud computing environment to make the
same hardware available to multiple users and to insulate one software environment
from another. This is one of the more prominent features distinguishing the cloud
computing environment from the HPC environment. In most cases, all three basic
components of a computer system—CPU, storage, and networking—are all virtual-
ized. This virtualization has many benefits. For example, an existing application can
run on a CPU chip without recompiling; many users can share the same hardware;
hardware faults could be corrected through the virtualization software; and appli-
cations on a failed compute node could be more easily migrated to another node.
However, this virtualization layer also imposes some runtime overhead and could
reduce application performance. For time-sensitive applications, this reduction in per-
formance could become a critical issue.
   Tests show that the performance differences could be quite large. Next, we briefly
describe a performance study reported by Jackson et al [2010]. Figure 22.2 shows the
performance slowdown using different computer systems. The names below the hor-
izontal axis are different software packages commonly used at NERSC. The left bar
corresponds to the Commercial Cloud, the middle bar to Magellan, and the (some-
times missing) right bar to the EC2-Beta-Opt system. The non-optimized commercial




FIGURE 22.2   The cloud ran scientific applications considerably slower than on HPC systems (circa
2010)
334                                    HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

                       14
                            IB                   10G - TCPoEth
                       12   Commercial Cloud     10G - TCPoEth Vm

                       10




         Performance
                       8

                       6

                       4

                       2

                       0
                            32       64        128         256         512         1024

FIGURE 22.3 As the number of cores increases (horizontal axis), the virtualization overhead becomes
much more significant (circa 2010)


cloud instances run these software packages 2 to 10 times slower than on a NERSC
supercomputer. Even on the more expensive high-performance instances, there are
noticeable slowdowns.
    Figure 22.3 shows a study of the main factor causing the slowdown with the soft-
ware package PARATEC. In Figure 2, we see that PARATEC took 53 times longer
to complete on the commercial cloud than on an HPC system. We observe from Fig-
ure 3 that, as the number of cores (horizontal axis) increases, the differences among
the measured performances (measured in TFLOP/s) become larger. In particular, the
line labeled “10G- TCPoEth Vm” barely increases as the number of cores grows. This
is the case where the network instance is using virtualized networking (TCP over Eth-
ernet). It clearly shows that the networking virtualization overhead is significant, to
the point of rendering the cloud useless.
    The issue of virtualization overhead is widely recognized (Chen et al. [2015]).
There has been considerable research aimed at addressing both the I/O virtualization
overhead (Gordon et al. [2012]) as well as the networking virtualization overhead
(Dong et al. [2012]). As these state-of-the-art techniques are gradually being moved
into commercial products, we anticipate the overhead will decrease in the future, but
some overhead will inevitably remain.
    To wrap up this section, we briefly touch on the economics of HPC versus cloud.
Typically, HPC systems are run by nonprofit research organizations and universi-
ties, while cloud systems are provided by commercial companies. Profit, customer
retention, and many other factors affect the cost of a cloud system (Armburst et al.
[2010]). In 2011, the Magellan project report stated that “Cost analysis shows that
DOE centers are cost competitive, typically 3–7 × less expensive, when compared to
commercial cloud providers” (Yelick et al. [2010]).
    A group of high-energy physicists thought their use case was well-suited for
cloud computing and conducted a detailed study of a comparison study (Holzman
et al. [2017]). Their cost comparisons still show the commercial cloud offerings as
HPC SOFTWARE                                                                         335

approximately 50% more expensive than dedicated HPC systems for comparable
computing tasks; however, the authors worked with severe limitations on data
ingress and egress to avoid potentially hefty charges on data movement. For complex
workloads, such as the streaming data analyses discussed in this book, we anticipate
that this HPC cost advantage will remain in the future. A 2016 National Academy of
Sciences study came to the same conclusion that even a long-term lease from Ama-
zon is likely 2 to 3 times more expensive than HPC systems to handle the expected
science workload from NSF (Box 6.2 from National Academies of Sciences, [2016]).


22.5     HPC SOFTWARE

Ironically, the real power of a supercomputer is in its specialized software. There are a
wide variety of software packages available for both HPC systems and cloud systems.
In most cases, the same software package is available on both platforms. Therefore,
we chose to focus on software packages that are unique to HPC systems and have the
potential to improve computational intelligence and forecasting technologies.
   One noticeable feature of the HPC software ecosystem is that much of the appli-
cation software performs its own interprocessor communication through Message
Passing Interface (MPI). In fact, the cornerstone of most scientific computing books
is MPI (Kumar et al. [1994], Gropp, Lusk, and Skjellum [1999]). Accordingly, our
discussion of HPC software tools will start with MPI. As this book relies on data pro-
cessing algorithms, we will concentrate on data management tools (Shoshami and
Rotem [2010]).


22.5.1    Message Passing Interface
Message Passing Interface is a communication protocol for parallel computing
(Gropp, Lusk, and Skjellum [1999], Snir et al. [1988]). It defines a number of point-
to-point data exchange operations as well as some collective communication oper-
ations. The MPI standard was established based on several early attempts to build
portable communication libraries. The early implementation from Argonne National
Lab, named MPICH, was high performance, scalable, and portable. This helped MPI
to gain wide acceptance among scientific users.
    The success of MPI is partly due to its separation of Language Independent Spec-
ifications (LIS) from its language bindings. This allows the same core function to
be provided to many different programming languages, which also contributes to
its acceptance. The first MPI standard specified ANSI C and Fortran-77 bindings
together with the LIS. The draft specification was presented to the user community
at the 1994 Supercomputing Conference.
    Another key factor contributing to MPI’s success is the open-source license used
by MPICH. This license allows the vendors to take the source code to produce their
own custom versions, which allows the HPC system vendors to quickly produce their
own MPI libraries. To this day, all HPC systems support the familiar MPI on their
computers. This wide adoption also ensures that MPI will continue to be the favorite
communication protocol among the users of HPC systems.
336                                 HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

22.5.2    Hierarchical Data Format 5
In describing the HPC hardware components, we noted that the storage systems in
an HPC platform are typically different from those in a cloud platform. Correspond-
ingly, the software libraries used by most users for accessing the storage systems are
different as well. This difference can be traced to the difference in the conceptual
models of data. Typically, HPC applications treat data as multi-dimensional arrays
and, therefore, the most popular I/O libraries on HPC systems are designed to work
with multi-dimensional arrays. Here, we describe the most widely used array format
library, HDF5 (Folk et al. [2011]).
   HDF5 is the fifth iteration of the Hierarchical Data Format, produced by the HDF
Group.2 The basic unit of data in HDF5 is an array plus its associated information
such as attributes, dimensions, and data type. Together, they are known as a data set.
Data sets can be grouped into large units called groups, and groups can be organized
into high-level groups. This flexible hierarchical organization allows users to express
complex relationships among the data sets.
   Beyond the basic library for organizing user data into files, the HDF Group also
provides a suite of tools and specialization of HDF5 for different applications. For
example, HDF5 includes a performance profiling tool. NASA has a specialization of
HDF5, named HDF5-EOS, for data from their Earth-Observing System (EOS); and
the next-generation DNA sequence community has produced a specialization named
BioHDF for their bioinformatics data.
   HDF5 provides an efficient way for accessing the storage systems on HPC plat-
form. In tests, we have demonstrated that using HDF5 to store stock markets data
significantly speeds up the analysis operations. This is largely due to its efficient com-
pression/decompression algorithms that minimize network traffic and I/O operations,
which brings us to our next point.


22.5.3    In Situ Processing
Over the last few decades, CPU performance has roughly doubled every 18 months
(Moore’s law), while disk performance has been increasing less than 5% a year. This
difference has caused it to take longer and longer to write out the content of the CPU
memory. To address this issue, a number of research efforts have focused on in situ
analysis capability (Ayachit et al. [2016]).
   Among the current generation of processing systems, the Adaptable I/O System
(ADIOS) is the most widely used (Liu et al. [2014]). It employs a number of data
transport engines that allow users to tap into the I/O stream and perform analytical
operations. This is useful because irrelevant data can be discarded in-flight, hence
avoiding its slow and voluminous storage. This same in situ mechanism also allows it
to complete write operations very quickly. In fact, it initially gained attention because
of its write speed. Since then, the ADIOS developers have worked with a number of
very large teams to improve their I/O pipelines and their analysis capability.

2 The HDF Group web site is https://www.hdfgroup.org/.
USE CASES                                                                          337

   Because ADIOS supports streaming data accesses, it is also highly relevant to
CIFT work. In a number of demonstrations, ADIOS with ICEE transport engine was
able to complete distributed streaming data analysis in real-time (Choi et al. [2013]).
We will describe one of the use cases involving blobs in fusion plasma in the next
section.
   To summarize, in situ data processing capability is another very useful tool from
the HPC ecosystem.


22.5.4    Convergence
We mentioned earlier that the HPC hardware market is a tiny part of the overall com-
puter hardware market. The HPC software market is even smaller compared to the
overall software market. So far, the HPC software ecosystem is largely maintained
by a number of small vendors along with some open-source contributors. Therefore,
HPC system users are under tremendous pressure to migrate to the better supported
cloud software systems. This is a significant driver for convergence between software
for HPC and software for cloud (Fox et al. [2015]).
   Even though convergence appears to be inevitable, we advocate for a convergence
option that keeps the advantage of the software tools mentioned above. One of the
motivations of the CIFT project is to seek a way to transfer the above tools to the
computing environments of the future.


22.6     USE CASES

Data processing is such an important part of modern scientific research that some
researchers are calling it the fourth paradigm of science (Hey, Tansley, and Tolle
[2009]). In economics, the same data-driven research activities have led to the wildly
popular behavioral economics (Camerer and Loewenstein [2011]). Much of the recent
advances in data-driven research are based on machine learning applications (Qiu
et al. [2016], Rudin and Wagstaff [2014]). Their successes in a wide variety of fields,
such as planetary science and bioinformatics, have generated considerable interest
among researchers from diverse domains. In the rest of this section, we describe a
few examples applying advanced data analysis techniques to various fields, where
many of these use cases originated in the CIFT project.


22.6.1    Supernova Hunting
In astronomy, the determination of many important facts such as the expansion speed
of the universe, is performed by measuring the light from exploding type Ia super-
novae (Bloom et al. [2012]). The process of searching the night sky for exploding
supernovae is called synoptic imaging survey. The Palomar Transient Factory (PTF)
is an example of such a synoptic survey (Nicholas et al. [2009]). The PTF telescopes
scan the night sky and produce a set of images every 45 minutes. The new image is
compared against the previous observations of the same patch of sky to determine
338                                HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE




FIGURE 22.4 Supernova SN 2011fe was discovered 11 hours after first evidence of explosion, as a
result of the extensive automation in classification of astronomical observations



what has changed and to classify the changes. Such identification and classification
tasks used to be performed by astronomers manually. However, the current number of
incoming images from the PTF telescopes is too large for manual inspection. An auto-
mated workflow for these image processing tasks has been developed and deployed
at a number of different computer centers.
    Figure 22.4 shows the supernova that was identified earliest in its explosion pro-
cess. On August 23, 2011, a patch of the sky showed no sign of this star, but a faint
light showed up on August 24. This quick turnover allowed astronomers around the
world to perform detailed follow-up observations, which are important for determin-
ing the parameters related to the expansion of the universe.
    The quick identification of this supernova is an important demonstration of the
machine learning capability of the automated workflow. This workflow processes the
incoming images to extract the objects that have changed since last observed. It then
classifies the changed object to determine a preliminary type based on the previous
training. Since follow-up resources for extracting novel science from fast-changing
transients are precious, the classification not only needs to indicate the assumed type
but also the likelihood and confidence of the classification. Using classification algo-
rithms trained on PTF data, the mislabeling of transients and variable stars has a
3.8% overall error rate. Additional work is expected to achieve higher accuracy rates
in upcoming surveys, such as for the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope.


22.6.2   Blobs in Fusion Plasma
Large-scale scientific exploration in domains such as physics and climatology are
huge international collaborations involving thousands of scientists each. As these
USE CASES                                                                              339

collaborations produce more and more data at progressively faster rates, the exist-
ing workflow management systems are hard-pressed to keep pace. A necessary
solution is to process, analyze, summarize, and reduce the data before it reaches the
relatively slow disk storage system, a process known as in-transit processing (or in-
flight analysis). Working with the ADIOS developers, we have implemented the ICEE
transport engine to dramatically increase the data-handling capability of collaborative
workflow systems (Choi et al. [2013]). This new feature significantly improved the
data flow management for distributed workflows. Tests showed that the ICEE engine
allowed a number of large international collaborations to make near real-time collabo-
rative decisions. Here, we briefly describe the fusion collaboration involving KSTAR.
    KSTAR is a nuclear fusion reactor with fully superconducting magnets. It is
located in South Korea, but there are a number of associated research teams around
the world. During a run of a fusion experiment, some researchers control the physics
device at KSTAR, but others may want to participate by performing collaborative
analysis of the preceding runs of the experiment to provide advice on how to config-
ure the device for the next run. During the analysis of the experimental measurement
data, scientists might run simulations or examine previous simulations to study para-
metric choices. Typically, there may be a lapse of 10 to 30 minutes between two suc-
cessive runs, and all collaborative analyses need to complete during this time window
in order to affect the next run.
    We have demonstrated the functionality of the ICEE workflow system with two
different types of data: one from the Electron Cyclotron Emission Imaging (ECEI)
data measured at KSTAR, and the other involving synthetic diagnostic data from the
XGC modelling. The distributed workflow engine needs to collect data from these
two sources, extract a feature known as blobs, track the movement of these blobs,
predict the movement of the blobs in the experimental measurements, and then pro-
vide advices on actions to be performed. Figure 22.5 shows how the ECEI data is
processed. The workflow for the XGC simulation data is similar to what is shown in
Figure 22.5, except that the XGC data is located at NERSC.




            FIGURE 22.5   A distributed workflow for studying fusion plasma dynamics
340                             HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

    To be able to complete the above analytical tasks in real-time, effective data man-
agement with ICEE transport engine of ADIOS is only part of the story. The second
part is to detect blobs efficiently (Wu et al. [2016]). In this work, we need to reduce
the amount of data transported across wide-area networks by selecting only the nec-
essary chunks. We then identify all cells within the blobs and group these cells into
connected regions in space, where each connected region forms a blob. The new algo-
rithm we developed partitions the work into different CPU cores by taking full advan-
tage of the MPI for communication between the nodes and the shared memory among
the CPU cores on the same node. Additionally, we also updated the connected com-
ponent label algorithm to correctly identify blobs at the edge, which were frequently
missed by the earlier detection algorithms. Overall, our algorithm was able to iden-
tify blobs in a few milliseconds for each time step by taking full advantage of the
parallelism available in the HPC system.


22.6.3   Intraday Peak Electricity Usage
Utility companies are deploying advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) to capture
electricity consumption in unprecedented spatial and temporal detail. This vast and
fast-growing stream of data provides an important testing ground for the predictive
capability based on big data analytical platforms (Kim et al. [2015]). These cutting-
edge data science techniques, together with behavioral theories, enable behavior ana-
lytics to gain novel insights into patterns of electricity consumption and their under-
lying drivers (Todd et al. [2014]).
    As electricity cannot be easily stored, its generation must match consumption.
When the demand exceeds the generation capacity, a blackout will occur, typically
during the time when consumers need electricity the most. Because increasing gener-
ation capacity is expensive and requires years of time, regulators and utility compa-
nies have devised a number of pricing schemes intended to discourage unnecessary
consumption during peak demand periods.
    To measure the effectiveness of a pricing policy on peak demand, one can analyze
the electricity usage data generated by AMI. Our work focuses on extracting base-
line models of household electricity usage for a behavior analytics study. The baseline
models would ideally capture the pattern of household electricity usage including all
features except the new pricing schemes. There are numerous challenges in establish-
ing such a model. For example, there are many features that could affect the usage
of electricity but for which no information is recorded, such as the temperature set
point of an air-conditioner or the purchase of a new appliance. Other features, such
as outdoor temperature, are known, but their impact is difficult to capture in simple
functions.
    Our work developed a number of new baseline models that could satisfy the above
requirements. At present, the gold standard baseline is a well-designed randomized
control group. We showed that our new data-driven baselines could accurately pre-
dict the average electricity usage of the control group. For this evaluation, we use a
well-designed study from a region of the United States where the electricity usage is
the highest in the afternoon and evening during the months of May through August.
USE CASES                                                                               341

Though this work concentrates on demonstrating that the new baseline models are
effective for groups, we believe that these new models are also useful for studying
individual households in the future.
    We explored a number of standard black-box approaches. Among machine learn-
ing methods, we found gradient tree boosting (GTB) to be more effective than oth-
ers. However, the most accurate GTB models require lagged variables as features
(for example, the electricity usage a day before and a week before). In our work, we
need to use the data from year T-1 to establish the baseline usage for year T and year
T + 1. The lagged variable for a day before and a week before would be incorporating
recent information not in year T-1. We attempted to modify the prediction procedure
to use the recent predictions in place of the actual measured values a day before and a
week before; however, our tests show that the prediction errors accumulate over time,
leading to unrealistic predictions a month or so into the summer season. This type of
accumulation of prediction errors is common to continuous prediction procedures for
time series.
    To address the above issue, we devised a number of white-box approaches, the
most effective of which, known as LTAP, is reported here. LTAP is based on the fact
that the aggregate variable electricity usage per day is accurately described by a piece-
wise linear function of average daily temperature. This fact allows us to make pre-
dictions about the total daily electricity usage. By further assuming that the usage
profile of each household remains the same during the study, we are able to assign
the hourly usage values from the daily aggregate usage. This approach is shown to
be self-consistent; that is, the prediction procedure exactly reproduces the electricity
usage in year T–1, and the predictions for the control group in both year T and T + 1
are very close to the actual measured values. Both treatment groups have reduced
electricity usages during the peak-demand hours, and the active group reduced the
usage more than the passive group. This observation is in line with other studies.
    Though the new data-driven baseline model LTAP predicts the average usages of
the control group accurately, there are some differences in predicted impact of the new
time-of-use pricing intended to reduce the usage during the peak-demand hours (see
Figure 22.6). For example, with the control group as the baseline, the active group
reduces its usage by 0.277 kWh (out of about 2 kWh) averaged over the peak-demand
hours in the first year with the new price and 0.198 kWh in the second year. Using
LTAP as the baseline, the average reductions are only 0.164 kWh for both years. Part
of the difference may be due to the self-selection bias in treatment groups, especially
the active group, where the households have to explicitly opt-in to participate in the
trial. It is likely that the households that elected to join the active group are well-suited
to take advantage of the proposed new pricing structure. We believe that the LTAP
baseline is a way to address the self-selection bias and plan to conduct additional
studies to further verify this.


22.6.4   The Flash Crash of 2010
The extended time it took for the SEC and CFTC to investigate the Flash Crash of
2010 was the original motivation for CIFT’s work. Federal investigators needed to
342                                                        HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE


                    90               T
                                     T+1                                                     + +
                    85               GTB(T)                                              +         +                      2.0
                                     GTB(T+1)                                                          +
                                                                                    +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                    80       + + M(T)                                                                       +



 Temperature (°F)
                                     M(T+1)                                     +
                    75                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                            +                                   +
                    70                                                  +
                                                                    +                                               +
                    65                                         +                                                          1.0
                         +                                 +
                             +                         +
                    60                             +
                                 +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                        (a)


                    90               LTAP(T)
                                     LTAP(T+1)                                               + +
                    85       + + M(T)                                                    +         +                      2.0

                                     M(T+1)                                                            +
                                                                                    +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                    80
                                                                                                            +



 Temperature (°F)
                                                                                +
                    75                                                                                                    1.5
                                                                            +                                   +
                    70                                                  +
                                                                    +                                               +
                    65                                         +                                                          1.0
                         +                                 +
                             +                         +
                    60                             +
                                 +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                        (b)

FIGURE 22.6 Gradient tree boosting (GBT) appears to follow recent usage too closely and therefore
not able to predict the baseline usage as well as the newly develop method named LTAP. (a) GTB on
Control group. (b) LTAP on Control group. (c) GTB on Passive group. (d) LTAP on Passive group. (e)
GTB on Active group. (f) LTAP on Active group
USE CASES                                                                                                                              343

                    90               T
                                     T+1
                    85                                                                                                    2.0
                                     GTB(T)                                                  + +
                                                                                                   +
                                     GTB(T+1)                                            +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                    80                                                                                 +
                             + + M(T)                                               +



 Temperature (°F)
                                                                                                            +
                                     M(T+1)
                    75                                                          +                                         1.5

                                                                            +                                   +
                    70
                                                                        +
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                    +
                    65                                                                                                    1.0
                                                               +
                         +                                 +
                             +                         +
                    60                             +
                                 +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                        (c)


                    90               LTAP(T)
                                     LTAP(T+1)
                    85                                                                                                    2.0
                             + + M(T)                                                        + +
                                                                                                   +
                                     M(T+1)                                              +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                    80                                                                                 +
                                                                                    +



 Temperature (°F)
                                                                                                            +
                    75                                                          +                                         1.5

                                                                            +                                   +
                    70
                                                                        +
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                    +
                    65                                                                                                    1.0
                                                               +
                         +                                 +
                             +                         +
                    60                             +
                                 +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                        (d)

                                                       FIGURE 22.6              (Continued)


sift through tens of terabytes of data to look for the root cause of the crash. Since
CFTC publicly blamed the volume of data to be the source of the long delay, we
started our work by looking for HPC tools that could easily handle tens of terabytes.
Since HDF5 is the most commonly used I/O library, we started our work by applying
HDF5 to organize a large set of stock trading data (Bethel et al. [2011]).
344                                                        HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE


                    90               T
                                     T+1
                    85               GTB(T)                                                                               2.0
                                     GTB(T+1)                                                      +
                                                                                               +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                                                                                                       +
                    80
                             + + M(T)                                               + + +



 Temperature (°F)
                                                                                                            +
                                     M(T+1)
                    75                                                          +                                         1.5
                                                                                                                +
                                                                            +
                    70                                                  +
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                    +
                    65                                         +                                                          1.0
                         +                                 +
                                                       +
                             +                     +
                    60           +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                        (e)


                    90               LTAP(T)
                                     LTAP(T+1)
                    85                                                                                                    2.0
                             + + M(T)                                                        + +
                                                                                                   +
                                     M(T+1)                                              +




                                                                                                                                Electricity Usage (KWh)
                    80                                                                                 +
                                                                                    +



 Temperature (°F)
                                                                                                            +
                    75                                                          +                                         1.5

                                                                            +                                   +
                    70
                                                                        +
                                                                                                                    +
                                                                    +
                    65                                                                                                    1.0
                                                               +
                         +                                 +
                             +                         +
                    60                             +
                                 +             +
                                     + + +
                    55                                                                                                    0.5
                         0                 5                   10                   15                 20               25
                                                                        Hour
                                                                         (f)

                                                       FIGURE 22.6              (Continued)


   Let us quickly review what happened during the 2010 Flash Crash. On May 6,
at about 2:45 p.m. (U.S. Eastern Daylight Time), the Dow Jones Industrial Average
dropped almost 10%, and many stocks traded at one cent per share, the minimum
price for any possible trade. Figure 22.7 shows an example of another extreme case,
where shares of Apple (symbol AAPL) traded at $100,000 per share, the maximum
USE CASES                                                                               345




FIGURE 22.7 Apple Stock price on May 6, 2010, along with HHI and VPIN values computed every 5
minutes during the market hours


possible price allowed by the exchange. Clearly, these were unusual events, which
undermined investors’ faith and confidence in our financial markets. Investors
demanded to know what caused these events.
    To make our work relevant to the financial industry, we sought to experiment with
the HDF5 software, and apply it to the concrete task of computing earlier warn-
ing indicators. Based on recommendations from a group of institutional investors,
regulators, and academics, we implemented two sets of indicators that have been
shown to have “early warning” properties preceding the Flash Crash. They are the
Volume Synchronized Probability of Informed Trading (VPIN) (Easley, Lopez de
Prado, and O’Hara [2011]) and a variant of the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
(Hirschman [1980]) of market fragmentation. We implemented these two algorithms
in the C++ language, while using MPI for inter-processor communication, to take
full advantage of the HPC systems. The reasoning behind this choice is that if any
of these earlier warning indicators is shown to be successful, the high-performance
implementation would allow us to extract the warning signals as early as possi-
ble so there might be time to take corrective actions. Our effort was one of the
first steps to demonstrate that it is possible to compute the earlier warning signals
fast enough.
    For our work, we implemented two versions of the programs: one uses data orga-
nized in HDF5 files, and another reads the data from the commonly used ASCII text
files. Figure 22.8 shows the time required to process the trading records of all S&P
500 stocks over a 10-year timespan. Since the size of the 10-year trading data is
still relatively small, we replicated the data 10 times as well. On a single CPU core
(labeled “Serial” in Figure 22.8), it took about 3.5 hours with ASCII data, but only
603.98 seconds with HDF5 files. When 512 CPU cores are used, this time reduces to
2.58 seconds using HDF5 files, resulting in a speedup of 234 times.
    On the larger (replicated) dataset, the advantage of HPC code for computing these
indices is even more pronounced. With 10 times as much data, it took only about 2.3
346                                 HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE




FIGURE 22.8 Time to process 10-year worth of SP500 quotes data stored in HDF5 files, which takes
21 times longer when the same data is in ASCII files (603.98 seconds versus approximately 3.5 hours)


times longer for the computer to complete the tasks, a below-linear latency increase.
Using more CPU makes HPC even more scalable.
   Figure 22.8 also shows that with a large data set, we can further take advantage of
the indexing techniques available in HDF5 to reduce the data access time (which in
turn reduces the overall computation time). When 512 CPU cores are used, the total
runtime is reduced from 16.95 seconds to 4.59 seconds, a speedup of 3.7 due to this
HPC technique of indexing.

22.6.5    Volume-synchronized Probability of Informed Trading Calibration
Understanding the volatility of the financial market requires the processing of a vast
amount of data. We apply techniques from data-intensive scientific applications for
this task, and demonstrate their effectiveness by computing an early warning indicator
called Volume Synchronized Probability of Informed Trading (VPIN) on a massive
set of futures contracts. The test data contains 67 months of trades for the hundred
most frequently traded futures contracts. On average, processing one contract over 67
months takes around 1.5 seconds. Before we had this HPC implementation, it took
about 18 minutes to complete the same task. Our HPC implementation achieves a
speedup of 720 times.
    Note that the above speedup was obtained solely based on the algorithmic
improvement, without the benefit of parallelization. The HPC code can run on parallel
machines using MPI, and thus is able to further reduce the computation time.
    The software techniques employed in our work include the faster I/O access
through HDF5 described above, as well as a more streamlined data structure for stor-
ing the bars and buckets used for the computation of VPIN. More detailed information
is available in Wu et al. [2013].
USE CASES                                                                                    347




FIGURE 22.9 The average false positive rates (𝛼) of different classes of futures contracts ordered
according to their average.


    With a faster program to compute VPIN, we were also able to explore the para-
metric choices more closely. For example, we were able to identify the parameter
values that reduce VPIN’s false positive rate over one hundred contracts from 20%
to only 7%, see Figure 22.9. The parameter choices to achieve this performance are:
(1) pricing the volume bar with the median prices of the trades (not the closing price
typically used in analyses), (2) 200 buckets per day, (3) 30 bars per bucket, (4) sup-
port window for computing VPIN = 1 day, event duration = 0.1 day, (5) bulk volume
classification with Student t-distribution with 𝜈 = 0.1, and (6) threshold for CDF of
VPIN = 0.99. Again, these parameters provide a low false positive rate on the totality
of futures contracts, and are not the result of individual fitting.
    On different classes of futures contracts, it is possible to choose different parame-
ters to achieve even lower false positive rates. In some cases, the false positive rates
can fall significantly below 1%. Based on Figure 22.9, interest rate and index futures
contracts typically have lower false positive rates. The futures contracts on commodi-
ties, such as energy and metal, generally have higher false positive rates.
    Additionally, a faster program for computing VPIN allows us to validate that the
events identified by VPIN are “intrinsic,” in the sense that varying parameters such
as the threshold on VPIN CDF only slightly change the number of events detected.
Had the events been random, changing this threshold from 0.9 to 0.99 would have
reduced the number of events by a factor of 10. In short, a faster VPIN program also
allows us to confirm the real-time effectiveness of VPIN.

22.6.6    Revealing High Frequency Events with Non-uniform Fast
          Fourier Transform
High Frequency Trading is pervasive across all electronic financial markets. As algo-
rithms replace tasks previously performed by humans, cascading effects similar to
the 2010 Flash Crash may become more likely. In our work (Song et al. [2014]), we
348                                  HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

brought together a number of high performance signal-processing tools to improve
our understanding of these trading activities. As an illustration, we summarize the
Fourier analysis of the trading prices of natural gas futures.
    Normally, Fourier analysis is applied on uniformly spaced data. Since market
activity comes in bursts, we may want to sample financial time series according to an
index of trading activity. For example, VPIN samples financial series as a function of
volume traded. However, a Fourier analysis of financial series in chronological time
may still be instructive. To this purpose, we use a non-uniform Fast Fourier Transform
(FFT) procedure.
    From the Fourier analysis of the natural gas futures market, we see strong evi-
dences of High Frequency Trading in the market. The Fourier components corre-
sponding to high frequencies are (1) becoming more prominent in the recent years
and (2) are much stronger than could be expected from the structure of the market.
Additionally, a significant amount of trading activity occurs in the first second of
every minute, which is a tell-tale sign of trading triggered by algorithms that target a
Time-Weighted Average Price (TWAP).
    Fourier analysis on trading data shows that activities at the once-per-minute fre-
quency are considerably higher than at neighboring frequencies (see Figure 22.10).
Note that the vertical axis is in logarithmic scale. The strength of activities at once-
per-minute frequency is more than ten times stronger than the neighboring frequen-
cies. Additionally, the activity is very precisely defined at once-per-minute, which
indicates that these trades are triggered by intentionally constructed automated events.
We take this to be strong evidence that TWAP algorithms have a significant presence
in this market.
    We expected the frequency analysis to show strong daily cycles. In Figure 22.10,
we expect amplitude for frequency 365 to be large. However, we see the highest




FIGURE 22.10 Fourier spectrum of trading prices of natural gas futures contracts in 2012. Non-uniform
FFT identifies strong presence of activities happening once per day (frequency = 366), twice per day
(frequency = 732), and once per minute (frequency = 527040 = 366*24*60).
SUMMARY AND CALL FOR PARTICIPATION                                                                349

amplitude was for the frequency of 366. This can be explained because 2012 was
a leap year. This is a validation that the non-uniform FFT is capturing the expected
signals. The second- and third-highest amplitudes have the frequencies of 732 and
52, which are twice-a-day and once-a-week. These are also unsurprising.
    We additionally applied the non-uniform FFT on the trading volumes and found
further evidence of algorithmic trading. Moreover, the signals pointed to a stronger
presence of algorithmic trading in recent years. Clearly, the non-uniform FFT algo-
rithm is useful for analyzing highly irregular time series.


22.7    SUMMARY AND CALL FOR PARTICIPATION

Currently, there are two primary ways to construct large-scale computing platforms:
the HPC approach and the cloud approach. Most of the scientific computing efforts
use the HPC approach, while most of the business computing needs are satisfied
through the cloud approach. The conventional wisdom is that the HPC approach occu-
pies a small niche of little consequence. This is not true. HPC systems are essential to
the progress of scientific research. They played important roles in exciting new sci-
entific discoveries including the Higgs particle and gravitational waves. They have
spurred the development of new subjects of study, such as behavioral economics, and
new ways of conducting commerce through the Internet. The usefulness of extremely
large HPC systems has led to the 2015 National Strategic Computing Initiative.3
    There are efforts to make HPC tools even more useful by accelerating their adop-
tion in business applications. The HPC4Manufacturing4 effort is pioneering this
knowledge transfer to the U.S. manufacturing industry, and has attracted consider-
able attention. Now is the time to make a more concerted push for HPC to meet other
critical business needs.
    In recent years, we have developed CIFT as a broad class of business applications
that could benefit from the HPC tools and techniques. In decisions such as how to
respond to a voltage fluctuation in a power transformer and an early warning signal
of impending market volatility event, HPC software tools could help determine the
signals early enough for decision makers, provide sufficient confidence about the pre-
diction, and anticipate the consequence before the catastrophic event arrives. These
applications have complex computational requirements and often have a stringent
demand on response time as well. HPC tools are better suited to meet these require-
ments than cloud-based tools.
    In our work, we have demonstrated that the HPC I/O library HDF5 can be used to
accelerate the data access speed by 21-fold, and HPC techniques can accelerate the
computation of the Flash Crash early-warning indicator VPIN by 720-fold. We have
developed additional algorithms that enable us to predict the daily peak electricity

3 The National Strategic Computing Initiative plan is available online at https://www.whitehouse.gov/

  sites/whitehouse.gov/files/images/NSCI%20Strategic%20Plan.pdf. The Wikipedia page on this topic
  (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Strategic_Computing_Initiative) also has some useful links to
  additional information.
4 Information about HPC4Manufacturing is available online at https://hpc4mfg.llnl.gov/.
350                                  HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

usage years into the future. We anticipate that applying HPC tools and techniques to
other applications could achieve similarly significant results.
    In addition to the performance advantages mentioned above, a number of pub-
lished studies (Yelick et al. [2011], Holzman et al. [2017]) show HPC systems to
have a significant price advantage as well. Depending on the workload’s requirement
on CPU, storage, and networking, using a cloud system might cost 50% more than
using a HPC system, and, in some cases, as much as seven times more. For the com-
plex analytical tasks described in this book, with their constant need to ingest data
for analysis, we anticipate the cost advantage will continue to be large.
    CIFT is expanding the effort to transfer HPC technology to private companies,
so that they can also benefit from the price and performance advantages enjoyed by
large-scale research facilities. Our earlier collaborators have provided the funds to
start a dedicated HPC system for our work. This resource should make it considerably
easier for interested parties to try out their applications on an HPC system. We are
open to different forms of collaborations. For further information regarding CIFT,
please visit CIFT’s web page at http://crd.lbl.gov/cift/.



22.8    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The CIFT project is the brainchild of Dr. David Leinweber. Dr. Horst Simon brought
it to LBNL in 2010. Drs. E. W. Bethel and D. Bailey led the project for four years.
    The CIFT project has received generous gifts from a number of donors. This
work is supported in part by the Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research,
Office of Science, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-
05CH11231. This research also uses resources of the National Energy Research Sci-
entific Computing Center supported under the same contract.



REFERENCES

Aad, G., et al. (2016): “Measurements of√  the Higgs boson production and decay rates and coupling
     strengths using pp collision data at s = 7 and 8 TeV in the ATLAS experiment.” The Euro-
     pean Physical Journal C, Vol. 76, No. 1, p. 6.
Abbott, B.P. et al. (2016): “Observation of gravitational waves from a binary black hole merger.”
     Physical Review Letters, Vol. 116, No. 6, p. 061102.
Armbrust, M., et al. (2010): “A view of cloud computing.” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 53,
     No. 4, pp. 50–58.
Asanovic, K. et al. (2006): “The landscape of parallel computing research: A view from Berkeley.”
     Technical Report UCB/EECS-2006-183, EECS Department, University of California, Berke-
     ley.
Ayachit, U. et al. “Performance analysis, design considerations, and applications of extreme-scale in
     situ infrastructures.” Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Com-
     puting, Networking, Storage and Analysis. IEEE Press.
Bethel, E. W. et al. (2011): “Federal market information technology in the post Flash Crash era:
     Roles for supercomputing.” Proceedings of WHPCF’2011. ACM. pp. 23–30.
REFERENCES                                                                                          351

Bloom, J. S. et al. (2012): “Automating discovery and classification of transients and variable stars
     in the synoptic survey era.” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 124,
     No. 921, p. 1175.
Camerer, C.F. and G. Loewenstein (2011): “Behavioral economics: Past, present, future.” In
     Advances in Behavioral Economics, pp. 1–52.
Chen, L. et al. (2015): “Profiling and understanding virtualization overhead in cloud.” Parallel Pro-
     cessing (ICPP), 2015 44th International Conference. IEEE.
Choi, J.Y. et al. (2013): ICEE: “Wide-area in transit data processing framework for near real-time
     scientific applications.” 4th SC Workshop on Petascale (Big) Data Analytics: Challenges and
     Opportunities in Conjunction with SC13.
Dong, Y. et al. (2012): “High performance network virtualization with SR-IOV.” Journal of Parallel
     and Distributed Computing, Vol. 72, No. 11, pp. 1471–1480.
Easley, D., M. Lopez de Prado, and M. O’Hara (2011): “The microstructure of the ‘Flash Crash’:
     Flow toxicity, liquidity crashes and the probability of informed trading.” Journal of Portfolio
     Management, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 118–128.
Folk, M. et al. (2011): “An overview of the HDF5 technology suite and its applications.” Proceedings
     of the EDBT/ICDT 2011 Workshop on Array Databases. ACM.
Fox, G. et al. (2015): “Big Data, simulations and HPC convergence, iBig Data benchmarking”: 6th
     International Workshop, WBDB 2015, Toronto, ON, Canada, June 16–17, 2015; and 7th Inter-
     national Workshop, WBDB 2015, New Delhi, India, December 14–15, 2015, Revised Selected
     Papers, T. Rabl, et al., eds. 2016, Springer International Publishing: Cham. pp. 3–17. DOI:
     10.1007/978-3-319-49748-8_1.
Ghemawat, S., H. Gobioff, and S.-T. Leung (2003): “The Google file system,” SOSP ’03: Proceed-
     ings of the nineteenth ACM symposium on operating systems principles. ACM. pp. 29–43.
Gordon, A. et al. (2012): “ELI: Bare-metal performance for I/O virtualization.” SIGARCH Comput.
     Archit. News, Vol. 40, No. 1, pp. 411–422.
Gropp, W., E. Lusk, and A. Skjellum (1999): Using MPI: Portable Parallel Programming with the
     Message-Passing Interface. MIT Press.
Hey, T., S. Tansley, and K.M. Tolle (2009): The Fourth Paradigm: Data-Intensive Scientific Discov-
     ery. Vol. 1. Microsoft research Redmond, WA.
Hirschman, A. O. (1980): National Power and the Structure of Foreign Trade. Vol. 105. University
     of California Press.
Holzman, B. et al. (2017): “HEPCloud, a new paradigm for HEP facilities: CMS Amazon Web
     Services investigation. Computing and Software for Big Science, Vol. 1, No. 1, p. 1.
Jackson, K. R., et al. (2010): “Performance analysis of high performance computing applications
     on the Amazon Web Services Cloud. Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom).
     2010 Second International Conference. IEEE.
Kim, T. et al. (2015): “Extracting baseline electricity usage using gradient tree boosting.” IEEE
     International Conference on Smart City/SocialCom/SustainCom (SmartCity). IEEE.
Kumar, V. et al. (1994): Introduction to Parallel Computing: Design and Analysis of Algorithms.
     Benjamin/Cummings Publishing Company.
Liu, Q. et al., (2014): “Hello ADIOS: The challenges and lessons of developing leadership class I/O
     frameworks.” Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, Volume 26, No. 7, pp.
     1453–1473.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (2016): Future Directions for NSF
     Advanced Computing Infrastructure to Support U.S. Science and Engineering in 2017–2020.
     National Academies Press.
Nicholas, M. L. et al. (2009): “The Palomar transient factory: System overview, performance, and
     first results.” Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 121, No. 886, p. 1395.
Qiu, J. et al. (2016): “A survey of machine learning for big data processing.” EURASIP Journal on
     Advances in Signal Processing, Vol. 2016, No. 1, p. 67. DOI: 10.1186/s13634-016-0355-x
352                                  HIGH-PERFORMANCE COMPUTATIONAL INTELLIGENCE

Rudin, C. and K. L. Wagstaff (2014) “Machine learning for science and society.” Machine Learning,
      Vol. 95, No. 1, pp. 1–9.
Shoshani, A. and D. Rotem (2010): “Scientific data management: Challenges, technology, and
      deployment.” Chapman & Hall/CRC Computational Science Series. CRC Press.
Snir, M. et al. (1998): MPI: The Complete Reference. Volume 1, The MPI-1 Core. MIT Press.
Song, J. H. et al. (2014): “Exploring irregular time series through non-uniform fast Fourier trans-
      form.” Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on High Performance Computational Finance, IEEE
      Press.
Todd, A. et al. (2014): “Insights from Smart Meters: The potential for peak hour savings
      from behavior-based programs.” Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Available at
      https://www4.eere.energy.gov/seeaction/system/files/documents/smart_meters.pdf.
Wu, K. et al. (2013): “A big data approach to analyzing market volatility.” Algorithmic Finance. Vol.
      2, No. 3, pp. 241–267.
Wu, L. et al. (2016): “Towards real-time detection and tracking of spatio-temporal features: Blob-
      filaments in fusion plasma. IEEE Transactions on Big Data, Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 262–275.
Yan, J. et al. (2009): “How much can behavioral targeting help online advertising?” Proceedings of
      the 18th international conference on world wide web. ACM. pp. 261–270.
Yelick, K., et al. (2011): “The Magellan report on cloud computing for science.” U.S. Department
      of Energy, Office of Science.
Zeff, R.L. and B. Aronson (1999): Advertising on the Internet. John Wiley & Sons.
      Index




Page numbers followed by f or t refer to figure or table, respectively.


Absolute return attribution method,                 numerical example of, 231–233, 232f,
     68–69                                             233f, 233t
Accounting data, 23, 169                            practical problems in, 222–223, 223f
Accuracy                                            quasi-diagonalization in, 224, 229,
  binary classification problems and,                  233f
     52, 52f                                        recursive bisection in, 224, 229–231
  measurement of, 206                               risk-based, 222. See also Risk-based
AdaBoost implementation, 100, 100f                     asset allocation approaches
Adaptable I/O System (ADIOS),                       tree clustering approaches to,
     336–337, 339, 340                                 224–229, 225f, 228f, 232f
Alternative data, 24t, 25                         Attribution, 207–208
Amihud’s lambda, 288–289, 289f                    Augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test,
Analytics, 24t, 25                                     253, 254, 256. See also Supremum
Annualized Sharpe ratio, 205                           augmented Dickey-Fuller (SADF)
Annualized turnover, in backtesting, 196               test
Asset allocation                                  Average holding period, in backtesting,
  classical areas of mathematics used                  196
     in, 223–224                                  Average slippage per turnover, 202
  covariance matrix in, 223, 224, 225f,
     229, 231f, 232, 234
  diversification in, 4, 9, 222, 224, 234,        Backfilled data, 24, 152
     238                                          Backtesters, 8
  Markowitz’s approach to, 221–222                Backtesting, 139–244
  Monte Carlo simulations for,                      bet sizing in, 141–148
     234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244                    common errors in, 151–157


                                                                                     353
354                                                                         INDEX

Backtesting (Continued)                       probability of. See Probability of
  combinatorial purged cross-validation          backtest overfitting (PBO)
     (CPCV) method in, 163–167                random forest (RF) method to reduce,
  cross-validation (CV) for, 104,                98, 99
     162–163                                  selection bias and, 153–154
  customization of, 161                       support vector machines (SVMs) and,
  definition of, 151                             101
  “false discovery” probability and,          trading rules and, 171–172
     205                                      walk-forward (WF) method and, 155,
  flawless completion as daunting task           162
     in, 152–153, 161                       Backtest statistics, 195–207
  general recommendations on,                 classification measurements in,
     153–154                                     206–207
  machine learning asset allocation and,      drawdown (DD) and time under water
     223–244                                     (TuW) in, 201, 202f
  purpose of, 153                             efficiency measurements in, 203–206
  as research tool, 153, 154                  general description of, 196–197
  strategy risk and, 211–218                  holding period estimator in, 197
  strategy selection in, 155–156, 157f        implementation shortfall in, 202–203
  synthetic data in, 169–192                  performance attribution and, 207–208
  uses of results of, 161                     performance measurements in, 198
  walk-forward (WF) method of,                returns concentration in, 199–201
     161–162                                  runs in, 199
Backtest overfitting, 4                       run measurements in, 201–202
  backtesters’ evaluation of probability      time-weighted rate of returns
     of, 8                                       (TWRR) in, 198–199
  bagging to reduce, 94–95, 100               timing of bets from series of target
  combinatorial purged cross-validation          positions in, 197
     (CPCV) method for, 166–167               types of, 195
  concerns about risk of, 17, 119           Bagging, 94–97, 123
  cross-validation (CV) method and,           accuracy improvement using, 95–96,
     103, 155                                    97f
  decision trees and proneness to, 97         boosting compared with, 99–100
  definition of, 153–154, 171                 leakage reduction using, 105
  discretionary portfolio managers            observation redundancy and, 96–97
     (PMs) and, 5                             overfitting reduction and, 154
  estimating extent of, 154                   random forest (RF) method compared
  features stacking to reduce, 121–122           with, 98
  general recommendations on, 154             scalability using, 101
  historical simulations in trading rules     variance reduction using, 94–95, 95f
     and, 170–172, 178–179, 187             Bars (table rows), 25–32
  hyper-parameter tuning and, 129             categories of, 26
  need for skepticism, 11–12                  dollar bars, 27–28, 28f, 44
  optimal trading rule (OTR)                  dollar imbalance bars, 29–30
     framework for, 173–176                   dollar runs bars, 31–32
INDEX                                                                          355

  information-driven bars, 26, 29–32       big data analysis, 18, 236, 237f, 330,
  standard bars, 26–28                          331–332, 340
  tick bars, 26–27                         Bloomberg, 23, 36
  tick imbalance bars, 29–30               Boosting, 99–100
  tick runs bars, 31                         AdaBoost implementation of, 100,
  time bars, 26, 43–44                          100f
  volume bars, 27, 44                        bagging compared with, 99–100
  volume imbalance bars, 30–31               implementation of, 99
  volume runs bars, 31–32                    main advantage of, 100
Becker-Parkinson volatility algorithm,       variance and bias reduction using,
     285–286                                    100
Bet sizing, 141–148                        Bootstrap aggregation. See Bagging
  average active bets approach in, 144     Bootstraps, sequential, 63–66
  bet concurrency calculation in,          Box-Jenkins analysis, 88
     141–142                               Broker fees per turnover, 202
  budgeting approach to, 142               Brown-Durbin-Evans CUSUM test, 250
  dynamic bet sizes and limit prices in,
     145–148
  holding periods and, 144                 Cancellation rates, 293–294
  investment strategies and, 141           Capacity, in backtesting, 196
  meta-labeling approach to, 142           Chow-type Dickey-Fuller test, 251–252
  performance attribution and, 207–208     Chu-Stinchcombe-White CUSUM test,
  predicted probabilities and, 142–144,         251
     143f                                  Classification models, 281–282
  runs and increase in, 199                Classification problems
  size discretization in, 144–145, 145f      class weights for underrepresented
  strategy-independent approaches to,           labels in, 71–72
     141–142                                 generating synthetic dataset for, 122
  strategy’s capacity and, 196               meta-labeling and, 51–52, 142,
Bet timing, deriving, 197                       206–207
Betting frequency                          Classification statistics, 206–207
  backtesting and, 196                     Class weights
  computing, 215–216, 216f                   decision trees using, 99
  implied precision computation and,         functionality for handling, 71–72
     214–215, 215f                           underrepresented label correction
  investment strategy with trade-off            using, 71
     between precision and, 212–213,       Cloud systems, 330–331, 334–335
     212f                                  Combinatorially symmetric
  strategy risk and, 211, 215                   cross-validation (CSCV) method,
  targeting Sharpe ratio for, 212–213           155–156
  trade size and, 293                      Combinatorial purged cross-validation
Bias, 93, 94, 100                               (CPCV) method, 163–167
Bid-ask spread estimator, 284–286            algorithm steps in, 165
Bid wanted in competition (BWIC), 24,        backtest overfitting and, 166–167
     286                                     combinatorial splits in, 164–165, 164f
356                                                                        INDEX

Combinatorial purged cross-validation      overlapping training observations in,
     (CPCV) method (Continued)                109
  definition of, 163                       purpose of, 103
  examples of, 165–166                     purging process in training set for
Compressed markets, 275                       leakage reduction in, 105–106,
Computational Intelligence and                107f
     Forecasting Technologies (CIFT)       sklearn bugs in, 109–110
     project, 329                         CUSUM filter, 38–40, 40f
  Adaptable I/O System (ADIOS) and,       CUSUM tests, 249, 250–251
     337                                  CV. See Cross-validation
  business applications developed by,
     349–350
  Flash Crash of 2010 response and,       Data analysis, 21–90
     341–343                                financial data structures and, 23–40
  mission of, 330, 331, 337                 fractionally differentiated features
Conditional augmented Dickey-Fuller            and, 75–88
     (CADF) test, 256, 256f, 257f           labeling and, 43–55
Correlation to underlying, in               sample weights and, 59–72
     backtesting, 196                     Data curators, 7
Corwin-Schultz algorithm, 284–286         Data mining and data snooping, 152
Critical Line Algorithm (CLA), 221        Decision trees, 97–99
  description of, 222                     Decompressed markets, 275
  Markowitz’s development of, 222         Deflated Sharpe ratio (DSR), 204, 205f
  Monte Carlo simulations using,          Deployment team, 8
     234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244          Dickey-Fuller test
  numerical example with, 231–233,          Chow type, 251–252
     232f, 233f, 233t                       supremum augmented (SADF),
  open-source implementation of, 222           252–259, 253f, 257f
  practical problems with, 222–223,       Discretionary portfolio managers
     223f                                      (PMs), 4–5, 15
Cross-entropy loss (log loss) scoring,    Discretization of bet size, 144–145,
     133–134, 135f                             145f
Cross-validation (CV), 103–110            Diversification, 4, 9, 222, 224, 234,
  backtesting through, 104, 162–163            238
  combinatorial purged cross-validation   Dollar bars, 27–28, 28f, 44
     (CPCV) method in, 163–167            Dollar imbalance bars (DIBs), 29–30
  embargo on training observations in,    Dollar performance per turnover, 202
     107–108, 108f                        Dollar runs bars (DRBs), 31–32
  failures in finance using, 104          Downsampling, 38
  goal of, 103                            Drawdown (DD)
  hyper-parameter tuning with,              definition of, 201
     129–135                                deriving, 201
  k-fold, 103–109, 104f                     example of, 202f
  leakage in, 104–105                       run measurements using, 202
  model development and, 104              Dynamic bet sizes, 145–148
INDEX                                                                         357

Econometrics, 14, 85                        Chow-type Dickey-Fuller test,
  financial Big Data analysis and, 236        251–252
  financial machine learning versus, 15     supremum augmented Dickey-Fuller
  HRP approach compared with, 236,            (SADF) test, 252–259, 253f, 257f
     237f
  investment strategies based in, 6
  paradigms used in, 88                   Factory plan, 5, 11
  substitution effects and, 114           Feature analysts, 7
  trading rules and, 169                  Feature importance, 113–127
Efficiency measurements, 203–206            features stacking approach to,
  annualized Sharpe ratio and, 205             121–122
  deflated Sharpe ratio (DSR) and, 204,     importance of, 113–114
     205f                                   mean decrease accuracy (MDA) and,
  information ratio and, 205                   116–117
  probabilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR) and,     mean decrease impurity (MDI) and,
     203–204, 204f, 205–206, 218               114–116
  Sharpe ratio (SR) definition in, 203      orthogonal features and, 118–119
Efficient frontier, 222                     parallelized approach to, 121
Electricity consumption analysis,           plotting function for, 124–125
     340–341, 342f–343f                     random forest (RF) method and, 98
Engle-Granger analysis, 88                  as research tool, 153
Ensemble methods, 93–101                    single feature importance (SFI) and,
  boosting and, 99–100                         117–118
  bootstrap aggregation (bagging) and,      synthetic data experiments with,
     94–97, 101                                122–124
  random forest (RF) method and,            weighted Kendall’s tau computation
     97–99                                     in, 120–121
Entropy features, 263–277                   without substitution effects, 117–121
  encoding schemes in estimates of,         with substitution effects, 114–117
     269–271                              Features stacking importance, 121–122
  financial applications of, 275–277      Filter trading strategy, 39
  generalized mean and, 271–275,          Finance
     274f                                   algorithmization of, 14
  Lempel-Ziv (LZ) estimator in,             human investors’ abilities in, 4, 14
     265–269                                purpose and role of, 4
  maximum likelihood estimator in,          usefulness of ML algorithms in, 4,
     264–265                                   14
  Shannon’s approach to, 263–264          Financial data
ETF trick, 33–34, 84, 253                   alternative, 25
Event-based sampling, 38–40, 40f            analytics and, 25
Excess returns, in information ratio,       essential types of, 23, 24t
     205                                    fundamental, 23–24
Execution costs, 202–203                    market, 24–25
Expanding window method, 80–82, 81f       Financial data structures, 23–40
Explosiveness tests, 249, 251–259           bars (table rows) in, 25–32
358                                                                         INDEX

Financial data structures (Continued)    Fundamental data, 23–24, 24t
  multi-product series in, 32–37         Fusion collaboration project, 338–340,
  sampling features in, 38–40                 339f
  unstructured, raw data as starting     Futures
     point for, 23                         dollar bars and, 28
Financial Information eXchange (FIX)       ETF trick with, 33–34
     messages, 7, 24, 25, 281              non-negative rolled price series and,
Financial machine learning                    37
  econometrics versus, 15                  single futures roll method with, 36–37
  prejudices about use of, 16              volume bars and, 27
  standard machine learning separate
     from, 4
Financial machine learning projects      Gaps series, in single future roll method,
  reasons for failure of, 4–5                 36–37
  structure by strategy component in,    Global Investment Performance
     9–12                                     Standards (GIPS), 161, 195, 198
Fixed-time horizon labeling method,      Graph theory, 221, 224
     43–44                               Grid search cross-validation, 129–131
Fixed-width window fracdiff (FFD)
     method, 82–84, 83f
Flash crashes, 296                       Hasbrouck’s lambda, 289, 290f
  class weights for predicting, 71       Hedging weights, 35
  “early warning” indicators in,         Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI)
     345                                      concentration, 200, 201
  high performance computing (HPC)       HHI indexes
     tools and, 347–348                    on negative returns, 202
  signs of emerging illiquidity events     on positive returns, 201
     and, 331                              on time between bets, 202
Flash Crash of 2010, 296, 329–330,       Hierarchical Data Format 5 (HDF5),
     341–345                                  336
F1 scores                                Hierarchical Risk Parity (HRP)
  measurement of, 206                         approach
  meta-labeling and, 52–53                 econometric regression compared
Fractional differentiation                    with, 236, 237f
  data transformation method for           full implementation of, 240–242
     stationarity in, 77–78                Monte Carlo simulations using,
  earlier methods of, 76–77                   234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244
  expanding window method for,             numerical example of, 231–233, 232f,
     80–82, 81f                               233f, 233t
  fixed-width window fracdiff (FFD)        practical application of, 221
     method for, 82–84, 83f                quasi-diagonalization in, 224, 229
  maximum memory preservation in,          recursive bisection in, 224, 229–231
     84–85, 84f, 86t–87t                   standard approaches compared with,
Frequency. See Betting frequency              221, 236–238
INDEX                                                                          359

  traditional risk parity approach          optimal trading rule (OTR) algorithm
     compared with, 231–232, 233t,             with, 174, 175
     234, 235f                              triple-period labeling method and,
  tree clustering approaches to,               46
     224–229, 225f, 228f, 232f             Hyper-parameter tuning, 129–135
High-frequency trading, 14, 196, 212        grid search cross-validation and,
High-low volatility estimator, 283–284         129–131
High-performance computing (HPC),           log loss scoring used with, 133–134,
     301–349                                   135f
  ADIOS and, 336–337, 339, 340              randomized search cross-validation
  atoms and molecules in                       and, 131–133
     parallelization and, 306–309
  CIFT business applications and,
     349–350                               Implementation shortfall statistics,
  cloud systems compared with,                  202–203
     334–335                               Implied betting frequency, 215–216,
  combinatorial optimization and,               216f
     319–320                               Implied precision computation,
  electricity consumption analysis              214–215, 215f
     using, 340–341, 342f–343f             Indicator matrix, 64–65, 66, 67
  Flash Crash of 2010 response and,        Information-driven bars (table rows),
     329–330, 341–345                           26, 29–32
  fusion collaboration project using,        dollar imbalance bars, 29–30
     338–340, 339f                           dollar runs bars, 31–32
  global dynamic optimal trajectory          purpose of, 29
     and, 325–327                            tick imbalance bars, 29–30
  hardware for, 331–335, 332f, 333f,         tick runs bars, 31
     334f                                    volume imbalance bars, 30–31
  integer optimization approach and,         volume runs bars, 31–32
     321–325, 322f                         Information ratio, 205
  multiprocessing and, 304–306,            Inverse-Variance Portfolio (IVP)
     309–316                                 asset allocation numerical example of,
  objective function and, 320–321               231–233, 232f, 233f, 233t
  pattern-finding capability in, 330–331     Monte Carlo simulations using,
  software for, 335–337                         234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244
  streaming data analysis using, 329       Investment strategies
  supernova hunting using, 337–338,          algorithmization of, 14
     338f                                    bet sizing in, 141
  use cases for, 337–349                     evolution of, 6
  vectorization and, 303–304                 exit conditions in, 211
Holding periods                              human investors’ abilities and, 4, 14
  backtesting and, 196                       log loss scoring used with
  bet sizing and, 144                           hyper-parameter tuning in,
  estimating in strategy, 196, 197              134–135, 135f
360                                                                         INDEX

Investment strategies (Continued)             triple-barrier labeling method for,
  profit-taking and stop-loss limits in,         45–46, 47f
     170–171, 172, 211                      Labels
  risk in. See Strategy risk                  average uniqueness over lifespan of,
  structural breaks and, 249                     61–62, 61f
  trade-off between precision and             class weights for underrepresented
     frequency in, 212–213, 212f                 labels, 71–72
  trading rules and algorithms in,            estimating uniqueness of, 60–61
     169–170                                Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Investment strategy failure probability,         (LBNL, Berkeley Lab), 18, 329,
     216–218                                     331
  algorithm in, 217                         Leakage, and cross-validation (CV),
  implementation of algorithm in,                104–105
     217–218                                Leakage reduction
  probabilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR)            bagging for, 105
     similarity to, 218                       purging process in training set for,
  strategy risk and, 216–217                     105–106, 107f
                                              sequential bootstraps for, 105
                                              walk-forward timefolds method for,
K-fold cross-validation (CV), 103–109            155
  description of, 103–104, 104f             Lempel-Ziv (LZ) estimator, 265–269
  embargo on training observations in,      Leverage, in backtesting, 196
     107–108, 108f                          Limit prices, in bet sizing, 145–148
  leakage in, 104–105                       Log loss scoring, in hyper-parameter
  mean decrease accuracy (MDA)                   tuning, 133–134, 135f
     feature with, 116                      Log-uniform distribution, 132–133
  overlapping training observations in,     Look-ahead bias, 152
     109
  purging process in training set for
     leakage reduction in, 105–106,         Machine learning (ML), 3
     107f                                    finance and, 4, 14
  when used, 104                             financial machine learning separate
Kyle’s lambda, 286–288, 288f                    from, 4
                                             HRP approach using, 221, 224
                                             human investors and, 4, 14
Labeling, 43–55                              prejudices about use of, 16
  daily volatility at intraday estimation   Machine learning asset allocation,
     for, 44–45                                 223–244. See also Hierarchical
  dropping unnecessary or                       Risk Parity (HRP) approach
     under-populated labels in, 54–55        Monte Carlo simulations for,
  fixed-time horizon labeling method            234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244
     for, 43–44                              numerical example of, 231–233, 232f,
  learning side and size in, 48–50              233f, 233t
  meta-labeling and, 50–53                   quasi-diagonalization in, 224, 229,
  quantamental approach using, 53–54            233f
INDEX                                                                      361

 recursive bisection in, 224, 229–231    Kyle’s lambda and, 286–288, 288f
 tree clustering approaches to,          microstructural information definition
    224–229, 225f, 228f, 232f               and, 295–296
Market data, 24–25, 24t                  probability of informed trading and,
Markowitz, Harry, 221–222                   290–292
Maximum dollar position size, in         Roll model and, 282–283
    backtesting, 196                     sequential trade models and, 290
Maximum likelihood estimator, in         strategic trade models and, 286
    entropy, 264–265                     tick rule and, 282
Mean decrease accuracy (MDA) feature     volume-synchronized probability of
    importance, 116–117                     informed trading (VPIN) and, 292
 computed on synthetic dataset,         Mixture of Gaussians (EF3M),
    125–126, 126f                           141–142, 149, 217–219
 considerations in working with,        Model development
    116                                  cross-validation (CV) for, 104,
 implementation of, 116–117                 108–109
 single feature importance (SFI) and,    overfitting reduction and, 154
    127                                  single feature importance method
Mean decrease impurity (MDI) feature        and, 117
    importance, 114–116                 Modelling, 91–135
 computed on synthetic dataset, 125,     applications of entropy to, 275
    125f                                 backtesting in, 153
 considerations in working with, 115     cross-validation in, 103–110
 implementation of, 115–116              econometrics and, 15
 single feature importance (SFI) and,    ensemble methods in, 93–101
    127                                  entropy features in, 275–277
Message Passing Interface (MPI), 335     feature importance in, 113–127
Meta-labeling, 50–55                     hyper-parameter tuning with
 bet sizing using, 142                      cross-validation in, 129–135
 code enhancements for, 50–51            market microstructure theories and,
 description of, 50, 127                    281–282
 dropping unnecessary or                 three sources of errors in, 93
    under-populated labels in, 54–55    Monte Carlo simulations
 how to use, 51–53                       machine learning asset allocation and,
 quantamental approach using, 53–54         234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244
Meta-strategy paradigm, 5, 6, 11, 18     sequential bootstraps evaluation
Microstructural features, 281–296           using, 66–68, 68f
 alternative features of, 293–295       Multi-product series, 32–37
 Amihud’s lambda and, 288–289, 289f      ETF trick for, 33–34
 bid-ask spread estimator                PCA weights for, 35–36, 35f
    (Corwin-Schultz algorithm) and,      single future roll in, 36–37
    284–286
 Hasbrouck’s lambda and, 289, 290f
 high-low volatility estimator and,     National laboratories, 5, 10, 18
    283–284                             Negative (neg) log loss scores
362                                                                            INDEX

Negative (neg) log loss scores              PnL (mark-to-market profits and losses)
    (Continued)                               ETF trick and, 33
 hyper-parameter tuning using,                performance attribution using,
    133–134, 135f                                207–208
 measurement of, 207                          as performance measurement, 198
Noise, causes of, 93                          rolled prices for simulating, 37
Non-negative rolled price series, 37        PnL from long positions, 198
                                            Portfolio construction. See also
                                                 Hierarchical Risk Parity (HRP)
Optimal trading rule (OTR) framework,            approach
     173–176                                  classical areas of mathematics used
  algorithm steps in, 173–174                    in, 223–224
  cases with negative long-run                covariance matrix in, 223, 224, 225f,
     equilibrium in, 182–187, 186f,              229, 231f, 232, 234
     187f–191f                                diversification in, 4, 9, 222, 224, 234,
  cases with positive long-run                   238
     equilibrium in, 180–182, 181f,           entropy and concentration in,
     182f, 183f–186f                             275–276
  cases with zero long-run equilibrium        Markowitz’s approach to, 221–222
     in, 177–180, 177f, 178f, 179f            Monte Carlo simulations for,
  experimental results using simulation          234–236, 235f–236f, 242–244
     in, 176–191                              numerical example of, 231–233, 232f,
  implementation of, 174–176                     233f, 233t
  overfitting and, 172                        practical problems in, 222–223, 223f
  profit-taking and stop-loss limits in,      tree clustering approaches to,
     173–208, 176–177, 192                       224–229, 225f, 228f, 232f
  synthetic data for determination of,      Portfolio oversight, 8–9
     192                                    Portfolio risk. See also Hierarchical
Options markets, 295                             Risk Parity (HRP) approach; Risk;
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (O-U) process,                Strategy risk
     172–173                                  portfolio decisions based on, 221–222
Orthogonal features, 118–119                  probability of strategy failure and,
  benefits of, 119                               217
  computation of, 119                         strategy risk differentiated from,
  implementation of, 118–119                     217
Outliers, in quantitative investing, 152    Portfolio turnover costs, 202–203
Overfitting. See Backtest overfitting       Precision
                                              binary classification problems and,
                                                 52–53, 52f
Parallelized feature importance, 121          investment strategy with trade-off
PCA (see Principal components                    between frequency and, 212–213,
     analysis)                                   212f
Performance attribution, 207–208              measurement of, 206
Plotting function for feature importance,   Predicted probabilities, in bet sizing,
     124–125                                     142–144, 143f
INDEX                                                                           363

Principal components analysis (PCA)           optimal trading rule (OTR) algorithm
  hedging weights using, 35–36,                  for, 173–174, 176–177, 192
     35f                                      strategy risk and, 211
  linear substitution effects and, 118,       triple-barrier labeling method for,
     119–121                                     45–46, 47f
Probabilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR)            Purged K-fold cross-validation (CV)
  calculation of, 203–204, 204f               grid search cross-validation and,
  as efficiency statistic, 203, 205–206          129–131
  probability of strategy failure,            hyper-parameter tuning with,
     similarity to, 218                          129–135
Probability of backtest overfitting (PBO)     implementation of, 105–106, 107f
  backtest overfitting evaluation using,      randomized search cross-validation
     171–172                                     and, 131–133
  combinatorially symmetric                 Python, 14
     cross-validation (CSCV) method
     for, 155–156
  strategy selection based on estimation    Quantamental approach, 4, 15, 53–54
     of, 155–156, 157f, 171                 Quantamental funds, 19
Probability of informed trading (PIN),      Quantitative investing
     276, 290–292                            backtest overfitting in, 113, 154
Probability of strategy failure, 216–218     failure rate in, 4
  algorithm in, 217                          meta-strategy paradigm in, 5
  implementation of algorithm in,            quantamental approach in, 53
     217–218                                 seven sins of, 152, 153
  probabilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR),         Quantum computing, 319–328
     similarity to, 218
  strategy risk and, 216–217
Profit-taking, and investment strategy      Random forest (RF) method, 97–99
     exit, 211                                alternative ways of setting up,
Profit-taking limits                             98–99
  asymmetric payoff dilemma and,              bagging compared with, 98
     178–180                                  bet sizing using, 142
  cases with negative long-run              Randomized search cross-validation,
     equilibrium and, 182–187, 186f,             131–133
     187f–191f                              Recall
  cases with positive long-run                binary classification problems and,
     equilibrium and, 180–182, 181f,             52, 52f
     182f, 183f–186f                          measurement of, 206
  cases with zero long-run equilibrium      Reinstated value, 24
     and, 177–180, 177f, 178f, 179f         Return attribution method, 68–69
  daily volatility at intraday estimation   Return on execution costs, 203
     points computation and, 44–45          Returns concentration, 199–201
  investment strategies using, 170–171,     RF. See Random forest (RF)
     172                                         method
  learning side and size and, 48            Right-tail unit-root tests, 250
364                                                                           INDEX

Risk. See also Hierarchical Risk Parity     Scalability
     (HRP) approach; Strategy risk            bagging for, 101
  backtest statistics for uncovering, 195     sample size in ML algorithms and,
  entropy application to portfolio               38, 101
     concentration and, 276                 Scikit-learn (sklearn)
  liquidity and, 7, 286                       class weights in, 71
  ML algorithms for monitoring, 14            cross-validation (CV) bugs in,
  PCA weights and, 35–36, 35f                    109–110
  portfolio oversight and, 8                  grid search cross-validation in,
  profit taking and stop-loss limits and,        129–130
     44                                       labels and bug in, 55, 72, 94
  structural breaks and, 249                  mean decrease impurity (MDI) and,
  walk-forward (WF) approach and,                115
     161                                      neg log loss as scoring statistic and
Risk-based asset allocation approaches,          bug in, 134
     222                                      observation redundancy and bagging
  HRP approach comparisons in,                   classifiers in, 97
     236–238                                  random forest (RF) overfitting and,
  structural breaks and, 249                     98–99
Risk parity, 222. See also Hierarchical       support vector machine (SVM)
     Risk Parity (HRP) approach                  implementation in, 101
  HRP approach compared with                  synthetic dataset generation in, 122
     traditional approach to, 231–232,        walk-forward timefolds method in,
     233t, 234, 235f                             155
Rolled prices, 37                           Selection bias, 153–154, 167
Roll model, 282–283                         Sequential bootstraps, 63–68
                                              description of, 63–64
                                              implementation of, 64–65
Sample weights, 59–72                         leakage reduction using, 105
  average uniqueness of labels over           Monte Carlo experiments evaluating,
     lifespan and, 61–62, 61f                    66–68, 68f
  bagging classifiers and uniqueness          numerical example of, 65–66
     and, 62–63                             Shannon, Claude, 263–264
  indicator matrix for, 64–65               Sharpe ratio (SR) in efficiency
  mean decrease accuracy (MDA)                   measurements
     feature importance with, 116             annualized, 205
  number of concurrent labels and,            definition of, 203
     60–61                                    deflated (DSR), 204, 205f
  overlapping outcomes and, 59–60             information ratio and, 205
  return attribution method and, 68–69        probabilistic (PSR), 203–204, 204f,
  sequential bootstrap and, 63–68                205–206, 218
  time-decay factors and, 70–71, 72f          purpose of, 203
Sampling features, 38–40                      targeting, for various betting
  downsampling and, 38                           frequencies, 212–213
  event-based sampling and, 38–40, 40f      Shorting, in quantitative investing, 152
INDEX                                                                         365

Signal order flows, 295                      optimal trading rule (OTR) algorithm
Simulations, overfitting of, 154                for, 173–174, 176–177, 192
Single feature importance (SFI),             strategy risk and, 211
     117–118, 125–127, 126f                  triple-barrier labeling method for,
Single future roll, 36–37                       45–46, 47f
Sklearn. See Scikit-learn                  Storytelling, 162
Stacked feature importance, 121–122        Strategists, 7
Standard bars (table rows), 26–28          Strategy risk, 211–218
  dollar bars, 27–28, 28f, 44                asymmetric payouts and, 213–216
  purpose of, 26                             calculating, 217, 218
  tick bars, 26–27                           implied betting frequency and,
  time bars, 26, 43–44                          215–216, 216f
  volume bars, 27, 44                        implied precision and, 214–215,
Stationarity                                    215f
  data transformation method to ensure,      investment strategies and
     77–78                                      understanding of, 211
  fractional differentiation applied to,     portfolio risk differentiated from,
     76–77                                      217
  fractional differentiation                 probabilistic Sharpe ratio (PSR)
     implementation methods for,                similarity to, 218
     80–84                                   strategy failure probability and,
  integer transformation for, 76                216–218
  maximum memory preservation for,           symmetric payouts and, 211–213,
     84–85, 84f, 86t–87t                        212f
  memory loss dilemma and, 75–76           Structural breaks, 249–261
Stop-loss, and investment strategy exit,     CUSUM tests in, 250–251
     211                                     explosiveness tests in, 249, 251–259
Stop-loss limits                             sub- and super-martingale tests in,
  asymmetric payoff dilemma and,                259–261
     178–180                                 types of tests in, 249–250
  cases with negative long-run             Sub- and super-martingale tests, 250,
     equilibrium and, 182–187, 186f,            259–261
     187f–191f                             Supernova research, 337–338, 338f
  cases with positive long-run             Support vector machines (SVMs), 38,
     equilibrium and, 180–182, 181f,            101
     182f, 183f–186f                       Supremum augmented Dickey-Fuller
  cases with zero long-run equilibrium          (SADF) test, 252–259, 253f, 257f
     and, 177–180, 177f, 178f, 179f          conditional ADF, 256, 256f,
  daily volatility computation and,             257f
     44–45                                   implementation of, 258–259
  fixed-time horizon labeling method         quantile ADF, 255–256
     and, 44                               Survivorship bias, 152
  investment strategies using, 170–171,    SymPy Live, 214
     172, 211                              Synthetic data
  learning side and size and, 48             backtesting using, 169–192
366                                                                          INDEX

Synthetic data (Continued)                    optimal trading rule (OTR)
 experimental results using simulation           framework for, 173–176
    combinations with, 176–191                overfitting in, 171–172
 optimal trading rule (OTR)                 Transaction costs, in quantitative
    framework using, 173–176                     investing, 152
                                            Tree clustering approaches, in asset
                                                 allocation, 224–229, 225f, 228f,
Tick bars, 26–27                                 232f
Tick imbalance bars (TIBs), 29–30           Triple-barrier labeling method, 45–46,
Tick rule, 282                                   47f, 145
Tick runs bars (TRBs), 31                   Turnover costs, 202–203
Time bars
  description of, 26
  fixed-time horizon labeling method        Variance
     using, 43–44                             boosting to reduce, 100
Time-decay factors, and sample                causes of, 93
     weights, 70–71, 72f                      ensemble methods to reduce, 94
Time period, in backtesting, 196              random forest (RF) method for, 97–98
Time series                                 Vectorization, 303–304
  fractional differentiation applied to,    Volume bars, 27, 44
     76                                     Volume imbalance bars (VIBs), 30–31
  integer transformation for stationarity   Volume runs bars (VRBs), 31–32
     in, 76                                 Volume-synchronized probability of
  stationarity vs. memory loss dilemma           informed trading (VPIN), 276, 282,
     in, 75–76                                   292
Time under water (TuW)
  definition of, 201
  deriving, 201                             Walk-forward (WF) method
  example of, 202f                           backtesting using, 161–162
  run measurements using, 202                overfitting in, 155, 162
Time-weighted average price (TWAP),          pitfalls of, 162
     24, 294                                 Sharpe ratio estimation in, 166
Time-weighted rate of returns (TWRR),        two key advantages of, 161–162
     198–199                                Walk-forward timefolds method, 155
Trading rules                               Weighted Kendall’s tau, 120–121
  investment strategies and algorithms      Weights. See Class weights; Sample
     in, 169–170                                weights
